# stat-230-final-project
Analyzing New York City Taxi Data

This project explores yellow taxi cab data in NYC. The full dataset online includes all trips completed in yellow taxis in NYC from January to June 2015, and records 18 variables described below in the "Data" section. This dataset is huge (146,087,462 rows and 5GB), and too big for our computers to work with, so we decided to load in data for 1 day where payment type was credit card because these were the only rides that recorded tips. We chose May 6, for no reason in particular, except that it is a non-holiday weekday. This one day has 288k observtions, which was still burdensome to work with so we took a random subset of 10% of the rows. This left us with 28,857 rows.

From NYC Open Data (https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Transportation/2015-Yellow-Taxi-Trip-Data/ba8s-jw6u): "This dataset includes trip records from all trips completed in yellow taxis in NYC from January to June in 2015. Records include fields capturing pick-up and drop-off dates/times, pick-up and drop-off locations, trip distances, itemized fares, rate types, payment types, and driver-reported passenger counts. The data used in the attached datasets were collected and provided to the NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission (TLC) by technology providers authorized under the Taxicab Passenger Enhancement Program (TPEP). The trip data was not created by the TLC, and TLC makes no representations as to the accuracy of these data." 

We were particularly interested in exploring 2 features of this taxi trips dataset: tipping behavior and ride availability at different times and locations. First, we will explore what factors predict how much (as a percentage of their total bill) a rider tips. It is standard to tip 20%, which we see in the data, but we wanted to explore exceptions to this norm. We will use a wide variety of variables to try to predict tip percentage. This knowledge could be very helpful to NYC taxi drivers willing to change their driving behavior to get bigger tips. Next, we will examine the most popular pickup and drop off locations in New York and at what times they are most popular, as well as in which direction taxis travel at different times of day. This knowledge would be useful to the taxi cab companies, or even city planners, informing them were more taxis or more public transportation options are needed.
